Freely available moderate-resolution data from Landsat (at ~30 m resolution) and Sentinel (at ~10 m resolution) allows for large and small scale environmental mapping of land cover classes, which allows for understanding how a natural landscape has changed, and how their change affects wildlife populations. This protocol is designed to provide a complete workflow using existing free and open source tools for land cover mapping using free moderate-resolution data from the initial stage of software installation (and troubleshooting), data querying and data download to creating an accurate land-cover map for a location and its visualisation for publication. This workflow will largely use a little-known optimised command-line program called FORCE (Framework for Operational Radiometric Correction for Environmental monitoring) that has many useful modules for a variety of purposes. The modules radiometric corrections, spectral-temporal metrics for better training data, and machine learning models for classification. This workflow will also incorporate several custom-written R scripts and QGIS in the workflow involving FORCE to create a modelling framework that is solely dependent on free and open access software, thereby making it reproducible. While reproducibility is a requirement for the scientific method, most studies in the field of ecological geospatial analysis are unfortunately un-replicable as they are 1) dependent on memory-hogging GUI-based paid software 2) without any replicable code or proper documentation for methodology. Through this workflow, I aim to change this practice, and help liberate spatial science, a necessity for developing countries like India who simultaneously lack key resources and also face rapid massive environmental damage.

This is a work-in-progress and the final section (to create a unified map from the individual maps of various classes) is yet to be added.

This study was carried out under the BIRD lab, ATREE, Bengaluru (PI: Rajkamal Goswami).

Reva Thekkoot (Affiliation at the time of publication: intern, BIRD Lab, ATREE Bengaluru) and Pujan Mehta (Affiliation at the time of publication: Research Associate, Foundation for Ecological Security) provided their help in testing this workflow in their systems, and also assisted me during the workshop to teach this workflow that I had conducted on the second day of Student Conference on Conservation Science - Bengaluru 2025 (SCCS-2025; on 23rd September 2025): https://www.sccs-bng.org/workshop-2.html#btnDay1Workshop10.
